---
layout: post
title: “Wish I’d learned that in high school”
---

Too often the nature of education is slipping from the minds of those being
educated. While it is debatable what end an education serves (“why?”), the
structure of its curriculum (“how?”) is well-understood. An education builds
aptitude towards *discourse* and *inquiry*. “English and math!”, repeat
educators ranging from designers of standardized tests to some of the world’s
[most respected scholars](https://github.com/kragen/knuth-interview-2006). This
isn’t new. Back in the middle ages, the way to the doctorate in medicine, law or
philosophy (the only terminal university degrees at the time, MD, JD and PhD,
have survived to our days) began with studies in 7 liberal arts divided into two
courses — trivium and quadrivium.

Both courses would be called “language” (at the time, Latin, not English) and
“mathematics” today, or even “verbal” and “quantative” reasoning. Trivium
included dialectic (aka informal logic), grammar and rethoric. It corresponded
to “pure thought”, “written thought” and “communicated thought”. Quadrivium
included arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy and stood accordingly for
“pure number”, “number in space”, “number in time” and “number in space and
time”. While trivium adequately represents the learning outcomes of literary,
historical and philosophical studies, quadrivium looks obsolete. Modern
mathematics containing algebra, analysis and topology is better represented by
the quadruple of “structure”, “quantity”, “space” and “change”.

Another change brought by modernity is abandonment of the idea that learning
from experience is appropriate for animals, but not for humans capable of
abstract reasoning. Study of observable facts, as opposed to study of apriori
values, has led to separation of philosophy and science. What remains in the
philosophical domain, is triple of metaphysics (“existence”), epistemology
(“knowledge”) and ethics (“morals”). Physics serves as a bridge to scientific
education from philosophy and mathematics, It requires another quadrivium of
“matter”, “energy”, “force” and “motion” exposing classical and quantum
mechanics. The natural sciences are to be covered with the third quadrivium of
chemistry, biology, geography and astronomy, corresponding to the spectrum of
phenomena in micro-, macro- and megaworld.

One must not be lead to believe that science is the only “practical” study that
came out of philosophy. While science attempts to describe and predict the
nature, history takes a similar approach in studies of the human society. On the
one hand, it uses sources and evidence to establish an account of events
(historiography, or the “critical” approach). On the other, it attempts to find
the patterns and direction in those events (“speculative” approach), and causes
behind them (“eschatological”).

So, three “verbal” triviums (language, philosophy, history) and three
“quantitative” quadriviums (mathematics, physics, science). I do not intend to
write an actual “curriculum” for any of them. Curriculums fail because of
confusion between different modes of knowledge genesis. Attractive simplicity of
presentation by *historical* order of discovery or by *theoretical* order of
derivation ignores that human minds learn by association of new information with
old. Curriculum design means establishing a new order, the order of knowledge
acquisition. And this is more like a range of broad topics that I wish I knew
better than I do.
